
This is the README file for emacs-wiki.

Synopsis
========
 
Emacs-wiki allows you to create a wiki on your local system and export
HTML pages.

Emacs-wiki has many uses. It has been used to organize links. It can
make web page maintenance and design a lot easier. It is used as the
back-end of Planner. You can store and link together various bits of
information in a coherent manner. A weblog of sorts can be made with
it, but RSS syndication is not supported.

Directory contents
==================

The directory structure is as follows.

The manual (emacs-wiki.texi) and the source code for emacs-wiki are in
the top-level directory.

contrib :: Files that are not a part of emacs-wiki proper, but are
           useful enough to be bundled with emacs-wiki.

examples :: Example CSS stylesheet.

scripts :: Scripts that are used when compiling emacs-wiki.

test :: Tests used for developing emacs-wiki.

Getting started
===============

Compilation
-----------

This is an optional step, since Emacs Lisp source code does not
necessarily have to be byte-compiled.  It will yield a speed increase,
though.

A working copy of Emacs or XEmacs is needed in order to compile
emacs-wiki.  By default, the program that is installed with the name
`emacs' will be used.

If you want to use the `xemacs' binary to perform the compilation, you
would need to edit `Makefile.defs' in the top-level directory as
follows.  You can put either a full path to an Emacs or XEmacs binary
or just the command name, as long as it is in the PATH.

EMACS    = xemacs
SITEFLAG = -no-site-file

Running `make' should compile the emacs-wiki source files.

Installation
------------

Emacs-wiki may be installed into your file hierarchy by doing the
following.

Edit the `Makefile.defs' file so that ELISPDIR points to where you
want the source and compiled emacs-wiki files to be installed and
INFODIR indicates where to put the emacs-wiki manual.  Of course, you
will want to edit EMACS and SITEFLAG as shown in the Compilation
section if you are using XEmacs.

If you are installing emacs-wiki on a Debian system, you might want to
change the value of INSTALLINFO as specified in `Makefile.defs'.

If you wish to install emacs-wiki to different locations than the
defaults specify, edit `Makefile.defs' accordingly.

Run `make' as a normal user.

Run `make install' as the root user if you have chosen installation
locations that require this.

Insinuation
-----------

Two things need to happen in order for emacs-wiki to be usable with
your version of Emacs or XEmacs.

 1. The location of the emacs-wiki directory needs to be added to the
    load path so that your variant of Emacs can find it.

 2. You need to load emacs-wiki and any auxiliary modules you want to
    use.

A quick example that accomplishes both of these follows.

;; Add this to your .emacs or .xemacs/init.el file.
(setq load-path (add-to-list 'load-path "/path/to/emacs-wiki"))
(require 'emacs-wiki)

Documentation
-------------

The emacs-wiki manual may be generated by running `make doc'.

It will produce two files: an Info file called `emacs-wiki.info' and
an HTML document called `emacs-wiki.html'.

This manual is also available online in several forms.

 - PDF: http://www.mwolson.org/static/doc/emacs-wiki.pdf
 - HTML (single file): http://www.mwolson.org/static/doc/emacs-wiki.html
 - HTML (multiple files): http://www.mwolson.org/static/doc/emacs-wiki/

Further Documentation
=====================

Please consult http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/EmacsWikiMode to
find more information on bugs, unimplemented features, and
user-contributed tweaks.

The current maintainer's website is at
http://www.mwolson.org/projects/EmacsWiki.html.

A mailing list for emacs-wiki and some related software exists;
consult http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/EmacsWikiMailingList for
details on joining it or viewing its contents.
