
This is the README file for Planner.

Synopsis
========

Planner is an organizer and day planner for Emacs.  It helps you keep
track of your pending and completed tasks, daily schedule, dates to
remember, notes and inspirations.  It is a powerful tool not only for
managing your time and productivity, but also for keeping within easy
keystroke reach all of the information you need to be productive.  It
can even publish reports charting your work for your personal web
page, your conscience, or your soon-to-be-impressed boss.

In fact, because it uses as its building blocks simple plain-text
files, it is an incredibly modular and flexible tool capable of
shaping and handling your personal information in ways whose variety
is limited only by your imagination.  Because of this, Planner has a
very active and generous community who regularly share their
innovations with each other.  Many of these modules and extensions are
included.

Directory contents
==================

The directory structure is as follows.

top level :: Planner source code and the documentation
             (planner-el.texi).

contrib :: Files that are not a part of Planner proper, but are useful
           enough to be bundled with Planner.

scripts :: Scripts that are used when compiling Planner.

Getting started
===============

Compilation
-----------

This is an optional step, since Emacs Lisp source code does not
necessarily have to be byte-compiled.  It will yield a speed increase,
though.

A working copy of Emacs or XEmacs is needed in order to compile
Planner.  By default, the program that is installed with the name
`emacs' will be used.

If you want to use the `xemacs' binary to perform the compilation, you
would need to edit `Makefile.defs' in the top-level directory as
follows.  You can put either a full path to an Emacs or XEmacs binary
or just the command name, as long as it is in the PATH.

EMACS    = xemacs
SITEFLAG = -no-site-file

In order for Planner to be byte-compiled properly, you will need to
specify the paths to Muse and other external software programs in
`scripts/planner-build.el'.  If a file fails to be byte-compiled, only
its source will be installed.

Running `make' should compile the Planner source files in the `lisp'
directory.

Installation
------------

Planner may be installed into your file hierarchy by doing the
following.

Edit the `Makefile.defs' file so that ELISPDIR points to where you
want the source and compiled Planner files to be installed and INFODIR
indicates where to put the Planner manual.  Of course, you will want
to edit EMACS and SITEFLAG as shown in the Compilation section if you
are using XEmacs.

If you are installing Planner on a Debian system, you might want to
change the value of INSTALLINFO as specified in `Makefile.defs'.

If you wish to install Planner to different locations than the
defaults specify, edit `Makefile.defs' accordingly.

Run `make' as a normal user.

Run `make install' as the root user if you have chosen installation
locations that require this.

Insinuation
-----------

Two things need to happen in order for Planner to be usable with your
version of Emacs or XEmacs.

 1. The location of the Planner directory needs to be added to the load
    path so that your variant of Emacs can find it.

 2. You need to load whichever Planner files you wish to make use of.

A quick example that accomplishes both of these follows.

;; Add this to your .emacs or .xemacs/init.el file.
(setq load-path (add-to-list 'load-path "/path/to/planner"))
(require 'planner)

Documentation
-------------

The Planner manual may be generated by running `make doc'.

It will produce two files: an Info file called `planner-el.info' and
an HTML document called `planner-el.html'.

This manual is also available online in several forms.

 - PDF: http://www.mwolson.org/static/doc/planner.pdf
 - HTML (single file): http://www.mwolson.org/static/doc/planner.html
 - HTML (multiple files): http://www.mwolson.org/static/doc/planner/

Further Documentation
=====================

Planner has an official website at http://www.plannerlove.com/.  It is
a collaborative wiki.

Bugs may be reported using the Planner Bug-Tracker at
https://gna.org/bugs/?group=planner-el.

A mailing list for Planner and some related software exists; consult
http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/EmacsWikiMailingList for details
on joining it or viewing its contents.
